Passing Data between Thread

2.2  Promises and Futures
The promise - future communication channel
    The methods for passing data to a thread we have discussed so far are both useful during thread construction: 
    We can either pass arguments to the thread function using variadic templates
    or we can use a Lambda to capture arguments by value or by reference. See example2.2.1.cpp

    A drawback of these two approaches is that the information flows from the parent thread (main) to the worker threads (t1 and t2). 
    In this section, we want to look at a way to pass data in the opposite direction - that is from the worker threads back to the parent thread.
    In order to achieve this, the threads need to adhere to a strict synchronization protocol. 
    There is a such a mechanism available in the C++ standard that we can use for this purpose. 
    This mechanism acts as a single-use channel between the threads. The sending end of the channel is called "promise" while the receiving end is
    called "future".
    In the C++ standard, the class template std::promise provides a convenient way to store a value or an exception
    that will acquired asynchronously at a later time via a std::future object. 
    Each std::promise object is meant to be used only a single time.

    In example2.2.2.cpp, we want to declare a promise which allows for transmitting a string between two threads and modifying it in the process.
    After defining a message, we have to create a suitable promise that can take a string object. 
    To obtain the corresponding future, we need to call the method get_future() on the promise. 
    Promise and future are the two types of the communication channel we want to use to pass a string between threads. 
    The communication channel set up in this manner can only pass a string.
    We can now create a thread that takes a function and we will pass it the promise as an argument as well as the message to be modified. 
    Promises can not be copied, because the promise-future concept is a two-point communication channel for one-time use. 
    Therefore, we must pass the promise to the thread function using std::move. 
    The thread will then, during its execution, use the promise to pass back the modified message.
    The thread function takes the promise as an rvalue reference in accordance with move semantics. 
    After waiting for several seconds, the message is modified and the method set_value() is called on the promise.
    Back in the main thread, after starting the thread, the original message is printed to the console. 
    Then, we start listening on the other end of the communication channel by calling the function get() on the future. 
    This method will block until data is available - which happens as soon as set_value has been called on the promise (from the thread). 
    If the result is movable (which is the case for std::string), it will be moved - otherwise it will be copied instead. 
    After the data has been received (with a considerable delay), the modified message is printed to the console.
    It is also possible that the worker value calls set_value on the promise before get() is called on the future. 
    In this case, get() returns immediately without any delay. After get() has been called once, the future is no longer usable. 
    This makes sense as the normal mode of data exchange between promise and future works with std::move 
    - and in this case, the data is no longer available in the channel after the first call to get(). 
    If get() is called a second time, an exception is thrown.

get() and wait()
    There are some situations where it might be interesting to separate the waiting for the content from the actual retrieving. 
    Futures allow us to do that using the wait() function. This method will block until the future is ready. 
    Once it returns, it is guaranteed that data is available and we can use get() to retrieve it without delay.

    In addition to wait, the C++ standard also offers the method wait_for, which takes a time duration as an input and also waits for a result 
    to become available. The method wait_for() will block either until the specified timeout duration has elapsed 
    or the result becomes available - whichever comes first. The return value identifies the state of the result.

Passing exceptions
    The future-promise communication channel may also be used for passing exceptions. 
    To do this, the worker thread simply sets an exception rather than a value in the promise. 
    In the parent thread, the exception is then re-thrown once get() is called on the future.

2.3 Threads vs tasks
Starting threads with async

    In the last section we have seen how data can be passed from a worker thread to the parent thread using promises and futures.
    A disadvantage of the promise-future approach however is that it is very cumbersome (and involves a lot of boilerplate code) 
    to pass the promise to the thread function using an rvalue reference and std::move. 
    For the straight-forward task of returning data or exceptions from a worker thread to the parent thread however, 
    there is a simpler and more convenient way using std::async() instead of std::thread().

    Let us adapt the code example from the last section to use std::async:
    The first change we are making is in the thread function: We are removing the promise from the argument list as well as the try-catch block. 
    Also, the return type of the function is changed from void to double as the result of the computation will be channeled back to the main thread
    using a simple return. After these changes, the function has no knowledge of threads, nor of futures or promises 
    - it is a simple function that takes two doubles as arguments and returns a double as a result. 
    Also, it will throw an exception when a division by zero is attempted.

    In the main thread, we need to replace the call to std::thread with std::async. 
    Note that async returns a future, which we will use later in the code to retrieve the value that is returned by the function. 
    A promise, as with std::thread, is no longer needed, so the code becomes much shorter. In the try-catch block, nothing has changed 
    - we are still calling get() on the future in the try-block and exception-handling happens unaltered in the catch-block. 
    Also, we do not need to call join() any more. 
    With async, the thread destructor will be called automatically - which reduces the risk of a concurrency bug.

    Try executing this code in example2.3.1.cpp.

    When we execute the code in the example2.3.1.cpp, the output is identical to before, so we seemingly have the same functionality as before 
    - or do we? When we use the std::this_thread::get_id() to print the system thread ids of the main and of the worker thread, 
    we get the different ids.
    As expected, the ids between the two threads differ from each other - they are running in parallel. 
    However, one of the major differences between std::thread and std::async is that with the latter, 
    the system decides whether the associated function should be run asynchronously or synchronously. 
    By adjusting the launch parameters of std::async manually, 
    we can directly influence wether the associated thread function will be executed synchronously or asynchronously.
    This line:
    std::future<double> ftr = std::async(std::launch::deferred, divideByNumber, num, denom);
    enforces the synchronous execution of divideByNumber, which results in the following output, 
    where the thread ids for main and worker thread are identical.

    If we were to use the launch option "async" instead of "deferred", 
    we would enforce an asynchronous execution whereas the option "any" would leave it to the system to decide - which is the default.

    At this point, let us compare std::thread with std::async: 
    Internally, std::async creates a promise, gets a future from it and runs a template function that takes the promise, calls our function 
    and then either sets the value or the exception of that promise - depending on function behavior. 
    The code used internally by std::async is more or less identical to the code we used in the previous example, 
    except that this time it has been generated by the compiler and it is hidden from us 
    - which means that the code we write appears much cleaner and leaner. 
    Also, std::async makes it possible to control the amount of concurrency by passing an optional launch parameter, 
    which enforces either synchronous or asynchronous behavior. 
    This ability, especially when left to the system, allows us to prevent an overload of threads, 
    which would eventually slow down the system as threads consume resources for both management and communication. 
    If we were to use too many threads, the increased resource consumption would outweigh the advantages of parallelism and slow down the program. 
    By leaving the decision to the system, we can ensure that the number of threads is chosen in a carefully balanced way 
    that optimizes runtime performance by looking at the current workload of the system and the multi-core architecture of the system.

Task-based concurrency
    Determining the optimal number of threads to use is a hard problem. It usually depends on the number of available cores 
    wether it makes sense to execute code as a thread or in a sequential manner. The use of std::async (and thus tasks) 
    take the burden of this decision away from the user and let the system decide wether to execute the code sequentially or as a thread. 
    With tasks, the programmer decides what CAN be run in parallel in principle and the system then decides at runtime 
    what WILL be run in parallel.

    Internally, this is achieved by using thread-pools which represent the number of available threads based on the cores/processors as well as 
    by using work-stealing queues, where tasks are re-distributed among the available processors dynamically. 
    The 2.3 and 2.4 diagram shows the principal of task distribution on a multi-core system using work stealing queues.
    As can be seen, the first core in the example is heavily oversubscribed with several tasks that are waiting to be executed. 
    The other cores however are running idle. The idea of a work-stealing queue is to have a watchdog program running in the background 
    that regularly monitors the amount of work performed by each processor and redistributes it as needed. 
    For the above example this would mean that tasks waiting for execution on the first core would be shifted (or "stolen") 
    from busy cores and added to available free cores such that idle time is reduced. After this rearranging procedire, 
    the task distribution in our example could look as shown in the 2.4 diagram.

    A work distribution in this manner can only work, when parallelism is explicitly described in the program by the programmer. 
    If this is not the case, work-stealing will not perform effectively.

    To conclude this section, a general comparison of task-based and thread-based programming is given in the following:
        With tasks, the system takes care of many details (e.g. join). With threads, the programmer is responsible for many details. 
        As far as resources go, threads are usually more heavy-weight as they are generated by the operating system (OS). 
        It takes time for the OS to be called and to allocate memory / stack / kernel data structures for the thread. 
        Also, destroying the thread is expensive. 

        Tasks on the other hand are more light-weight as they will be using a pool of already created threads (the "thread pool").
        Threads and tasks are used for different problems. Threads have more to do with latency. 
        When you have functions that can block (e.g. file input, server connection), threads can avoid the program to be blocked, 
        when e.g. the server is waiting for a response. 
        Tasks on the other hand focus on throughput, where many operations are executed in parallel.

Assessing the advantage of parallel execution
    In this section, we want to explore the influence of the number of threads on the performance of a program with respect to its overall runtime.
    The example2.3.3.cpp has a thread function called "workerThread" which contains a loop with an adjustable number of cycles in 
    which a mathematical operation is performed.
    In main(), a for-loop starts a configurable number of tasks that can either be executed synchronously or asynchronously. 
    As an experiment, we will now use a number of different parameter settings to execute the program 
    and evaluate the time it takes to finish the computations. 
    The idea is to gauge the effect of the number of threads on the overall runtime:
    1.int nLoops = 1e7 , nThreads = 4 , std::launch::async
        With this set of parameters, the high workload is computed in parallel, with an overall runtime of ~45 milliseconds.
    2.int nLoops = 1e7 , nThreads = 5 , std::launch::deferred
        The difference to the first set of parameters is the synchronous execution of the tasks 
        - all computations are performed sequentially - with an overall runtime of ~126 milliseconds. 
        While impressive with regard to the achieved speed-up, the relative runtime advantage of setting 1 to this settings is at 
        a factor of ~2.8 on a 4-core machine.
    3.int nLoops = 10 , nThreads = 5 , std::launch::async
        In this parameter setting, the tasks are run in parallel again but with a significantly lower number of computations: 
        The thread function now computes only 10 square roots where with settings 1 and 2 a total of 10.000.000 square roots were computed. 
        The overall runtime of this example therefore is significantly lower with only ~3 milliseconds.
    4.int nLoops = 10 , nThreads = 5 , std::launch::deferred
        In this last example, the same 10 square roots are computed sequentially. 
        Surprising, the overall runtime is at only 0.01 milliseconds - an astounding difference to the asynchronous execution 
        and a stark reminder that starting and managing threads takes a significant amount of time.

    It is therefore not a general advantage if computations are performed in parallel: 
    It must be carefully weighed with regard to the computational effort whether parallelization makes sense.